Preamble. WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation, do hereby adopt, enact and give to ourselves this Constitution.

12. Definition of State. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the State includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights. All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part III, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void. The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part.

14. Equality before law. The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.

15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children or for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.

16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State. No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for any employment or office under the State.

17. Abolition of Untouchability. Untouchability is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out of Untouchability shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc. All citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression; to assemble peaceably and without arms; to form associations or unions; to move freely throughout the territory of India; to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; and to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. These rights are subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by the State.

21. Protection of life and personal liberty. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.

21A. Right to education. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.

22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases. No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult and to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice. Every person arrested shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within twenty-four hours of such arrest.

25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion. Subject to public order, morality and health, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.

32. Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part. The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the fundamental rights is guaranteed. The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari.

36. Definition of Directive Principles. The Directive Principles of State Policy are guidelines laid down in Part IV for the framing of laws by the Government. Though not enforceable by any court, these principles are fundamental in the governance of the country.

44. Uniform civil code for the citizens. The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

51A. Fundamental duties. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions; to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired the national struggle for freedom; to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; and to safeguard public property and to abjure violence.

52. The President of India. There shall be a President of India, who is the head of the State and the first citizen of India.

54. Election of President. The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

55. Manner of election of President. The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.

74. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President. There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice.

80. Composition of the Council of States. The Council of States (Rajya Sabha) shall consist of twelve members nominated by the President and not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of the States and of the Union territories.

81. Composition of the House of the People. The House of the People (Lok Sabha) shall consist of not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States and not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories.

124. Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court. There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India and other Judges appointed by the President. A Judge of the Supreme Court shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years.

368. Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor. Parliament may, in exercise of its constituent power, amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article. An amendment requires a majority of the total membership of each House and a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting.
